---
title: 'Future Blog Post'
date: 2024-10-25
permalink: /posts/2012/08/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - cool posts
  - category1
  - category2
---

Through the course of our projects, we researchers make lots of little decisions that affect our analyses and our ultimate interpretations of data. As we work through our analysis, our minds cannot help but create an analysis that explains what we've seen so far. At the very least this affects our wording of the final write-up, but could decide what data or variables we choose to look at next, falsely guiding our research down an erroneous path. As responsible researchers we of course go to great length to guard ourselves against these biases. We'll ground our work in current theories and knowledge, use statistical corrections for multiple testing and discuss our work with fellow experts in our fields. But these measures introduce their own problems, limiting our ability to make large steps forward in our understanding, or to respond dynamically to shift changes in populations. There are some areas of epidemiology where these human biases can be countered better than in others. For example, when we are looking at biology using genetic epidemiology it is unlikely that our minds are going to create an intuitive narrative that will mislead which protein we instrument, for example. Alternatively however, there are some epidemiological questions that are just too tempting to our minds to make up a false narrative. And so we move on to my research.
Cross-sectional work with healthcare linked data of very large samples has found that _people whose eyes do not line up in childhood are at increased risk of anxiety and depression later in life._
Your training in epidemiology or medicine may prevent you from immediately creating a causal narrative for the claimed association, but a quick glance at the below picture and you can't help but start to suggest what life might be like for that child. Indeed, neuroscientific work has found activation in the emotional centre of the brain when you observe a face of someone with an eye misalignment [ibid]. 
One could imagine a child experiences bullying in school, or could struggle in situations requiring eye contact. These narratives are rarely based on first-hand past-experiences or a deep understanding of the social epidemiology of strabismus, but simply our own intuition. We could take this narrative and look for examples. This has been done. (I've found this reference that says _"people with strabismus are get invited to fewer birthday parties"_ very helpful in my funding applications [ibid]). You'll note that our narrative has led us away from our research question, into a guessing game of what it's like to have strabismus. This matters because it affects how we see people with the condition: How do we treat them?; Where should we focus our efforts in improving things for these people?
